### 18. Local System Security

  * Essential aspects of a security policy:
    * Confidentiality
    * Data Integrity
    * Availability
    * Consistency
    * Control
    * Audit

  * Risk analysis is based on three questions:
    1. What do I want to protect?
    2. What am I protecting it against?
    3. How much time, personnel and money is needed to provide adequate protection?
  * Two basic philosophies in security:
    1. everything not permitted is denied
    2. everything not denied is permitted

    the first choice is tighter and most common, the second choice offers a more  
    liberal environment for its users
  * General guidelines:
    1. the human factor is the weakest link
    2. no computing environment is invulnerable
    3. paranoia is a good thing

    Users should never put the current directory in their `PATH`, i.e.:
        PATH=./:$PATH
    as malicious users could substitute their own executables to do harm

  * Updating is important, as most attacks come between the time a security vulne-
    rability is released and a system is patched. **Zero day** exploits are rarer.

  * Hardware can be compromised by:
    * key logging
    * network sniffing
    * booting with a rescue disks
    * remounting/modifying disk content

    Necessary steps for hardware security:
      * lock down workstations/servers
      * protect network links from untrusted users
      * protect keyboards
      * BIOS password protection

    The BIOS is the:
      * lowest level of security
      * should be password-protected
      * should be updated

    Boot loaders should be protected by password as well as the BIOS
      * On GRUB 1 systems:
        * use `grub-md5-crypt` to generate password hash
        * add line to `/boot/grub/grub.conf`:
              password --md5 5f4dcc3b5aa765d61d8327deb882cf99
      * On GRUB 2:
        * edit system config files in `/etc/grub.d/`; add to, for example, `00_header`:
              set superusers="<username>"
              password <username> <password>
            **Note**: username must be name of a superuser
        * run `update-grub`

  * When mounting filesystems, options can be added to `/etc/fstab` for security:
      * `nodev`: do not interpret character/block Devices
      * `nosuid`: ignore `setuid`/`setgid` bits on file permissions
      * `noexec`: restrict direct execution of binaries
      * `ro`: mount in read-only mode

  * `setuid` and `setgid` permission bits:

    Normally, executables run with the privileges of the user/group who executed  
    the program. Occasionally, it makes sense for a program to have access to files/  
    capabilities of a superuser while being executed by a normal user.

    By setting the `setuid` flag on an executable, one modifies the default be-  
    havior by giving the access rights of the *owner* of the file, not the *user*.

    The `setgid` flag does this for the owner's group.

    Using either of these generally is a bad idea. It's usually better to write a  
    **daemon** with restricted privileges than to use this method. Some distros  
    disable these permission bits entirely.

    * To enable:
        chmod u+s somefile
        chmod g+s somefile

    * For directories, the `setgid` bit creates a shared directory, where files  
      created under the directory inherit the group of the parent directory, not  
      the file creator.

    * `setuid` has no effect on shell scripts.
