### 19. Linux Security Modules

  * **Security modules** should implement **mandatory access controls** over kernel
    requests in a way that:
    * Minimizes changes to the kernel
    * Minimizes overhead to the kernel
    * Permits flexibility and choice between different **L**inux **S**ecurity  
      **M**odules, or **LSM**

    The basic idea is to hook system calls or insert code whenever an application  
    makes a request to transition to system (kernel) mode. This code would make  
    sure permissions are correct and against malicious intent. It does this by  
    invoking security-related functional steps before/after a system call.

  * **SELinux** was the predominant security module in Linux since 2001, and the  
    **LSM** approach for extensible modules in 2003.

    The current **LSM** implementations are:
    * **SELinux**
    * **AppArmor**
    * **Smack**
    * **TOMOYO**

  * **SELinux** was developed by the **NSA** and was part of **RHEL** for a long  
    time, which gives it a large userbase. It is a set of security rules that de-  
    termine which processes can access files, directories, ports and other items.

    * It works with three concepts:
      1. **Contexts**: labels to files, processes, ports, ex.: user, role, type
      2. **Rules**: Describe access control in terms of contexts, processes, files,  
        ports, users, etc.
      3. **Policies**: a set of rules that describe what system-wide access control  
        decisions should be made by **SELinux**.

    * An **SELinux** context is a name used by a rule to define how users, pro-  
      cesses, files and ports interact with each other. As the default policy is  
      to deny any access, rules are used to describe allowed actions on the system.

    * **SELinux** may be run in any of the following modes:
      * **Enforcing**: all **SELinux** code is operative and access is denied ac-  
        cording to policy. All violations are audited and logged.
      * **Permissive**: enables **SELinux** code but only audits and warns about  
        operations that would be denied in enforcing mode.
      * **Disabled**: completely disables **SELinux** kernel and application code  
        leaving the system without any of its protections.

    * These modes are selected in a file (usually `/etc/selinux/config` or  
      `/etc/sysconfig/selinux` or some symlink thereof) and controlled by appro-
      priate commands:
      * `sestatus`: display current mode and policy
      * `getenforce`: examine current mode
      * `setenforce`: set current mode

    * `setenforce` can switch between `Enforcing` and `Permissive` modes on the  
      fly, but not to `Disabled` mode without:
      * editing the config (`/etc/selinux/config`) file:
            SELINUX=disabled
      * booting with a kernel parameter:
            selinux=0
      **Note**: it is better to run in `Permissive` mode instead of disabling  
      **SELinux**, as that requires relabeling the entire filesystem when re-enabled.

    * `/etc/sysconfig/selinux` also sets the **SELinux policy**. Multiple policies  
      are allowed, but only one can be active at one time. Changing the policy may  
      require a reboot and a re-label of the filesystem. Each policy has files that  
      must be installed under `/etc/selinux/[SELINUXTYPE]`.

    * Common **policies** are:
      * **targeted**: the default policy where **SELinux** is more restricted to tar-  
        geted processes and user/`init` policies are not targeted.
      * **minimum**: a modification of the targeted policy where only selected  
        processes are protected.
      * **MLS** (**M**ulti-**L**evel **S**ecurity): very restricted; all processes  
        are placed in security domains with particular policies

    * Four contexts (labels):
      * **User**
      * **Role**
      * **Type**
      * **Level**

    * **Type** is most commonly used. Convention dictates that **type** labels should  
      end with `_t`, as in `kernel_t`.

    * Many tools have been updated to work with **SELinux**:
      * `ps` can display context info:
            ps axZ
      * `ls` as well:
            ls -Z /home
      * `cp`, `mv` and `mkdir` have also been updated

    * New files inherit context from parent directory, but copied/moved files may  
      not adopt the context of their destination.
      * `restorecon [-Rv]`: restores file contexts based on the parent directory,  
        with `-R` can be made recursive, `-v` for verbose output

      * `semanage fcontext`: change default file creation context
        * `-a`: to all files
        * `-t [typecontext]`: set type context

    * **SELinux** can be reconfigured at runtime through boolean values:
      * `sudo semanage boolean -l`: list boolean values
      * `getsebool -a`: same thing as above
      * `setsebool [-P]`: set boolean, `-P` makes persistent

    * One can create policies from error logs:
          grep httpd /var/log/audit/audit.log | audit2allow -M mypol

      `audit2allow` is a tool that generates **SELinux** policy rules from logs  
      of denied operations.

    * `audit2why` translates audit messages into a description of why access was  
      denied

  * **AppArmor** is an **LSM** alternative to **SELinux**. It has been in the kernel  
    since 2006. It has been used on SUSE, Ubuntu and others.
    * **AppArmor**:
      * provides Mandatory Access Controls (**MAC**)
      * allows admins to associate a security profile to a program to restrict it
      * is considered easier than **SELinux** by some
      * is considered filesystem-neutral (doesn't require extended attributes)

      **AppArmor** supplements the traditional **Unix** **D**iscretionary **A**ccess
      **M**odel with **MAC**

      **AppArmor** provides a learning mode, whereby violations are logged but not  
      prevented. This can then be converted into a profile based on a programs's  
      typical behavior.
