### 20. Processes

  * A **process** is a running application that may have more than one **thread**.  
    They have attributes, states and permissions. There are two modes, **user** and  
    **kernel**.

    * Processes consist of:

      * environmental variables

      * open files

      * signal handlers

      * possibly child processes

      * **threads** or **tasks**, concurrently accessing shared resources, such as  
        memory addresses, open files, etc.

  * They can be **heavy weight** or **light weight** processes, having to do  
    with resource sharing and speed of context switching between threads of  
    execution.

  * Threads are considered as separate processes but return the same PID (group ID  
    to the thread) but internally have individual thread IDs (process IDs to the  
    thread)

  * The first user process is `init` and has the process ID = 1. It is started after
    the kernel mounts the root partition.

    `init` will run until the system is shut down and be the last process to ter-  
    minate. It is the parent process of all other user processes.

  * processes have:
    * `pid`: process ID

    * `ppid`: parent process ID

    * `pgid`: process group ID

    * `init` is root ancestor/parent process of every process except kernel processes,  
      which show up in `ps` listings with **[]** around their name.

    * if a parent process dies before the child, either:
      * their `ppid` is set to 1; `init` adopts the child process and monitors its  
        status
      * on a `systemd` system, the `ppid` would get set to 2, or the `pid` of `kthreadd`,  
        the process that adopts orphan child processes instead of `init` on those  
        systems.

    * if a child process dies and the parent process has not examined its exit  
      status, it is called a **zombie** process. **Zombie** processes have releas-  
      ed their resources and only exist to hold their exit code until it is read.  
      `init`, or `kthreadd`, is the process of last resort that reads these stat-  
      uses in the absence of another parent process and let them close com-  
      pletely, and is known as the **zombie killer** or **child reaper**.

  * Processes are controlled by **scheduling** which is preemptive. Only the ker-  
    nel can preempt a process. Historically, the largest PID was 32768, but this  
    can be altered by changing `/proc/sys/kernel/pid_max`. PIDs that reach `pid_max`  
    start enumerating again at PID = 300.

  * A process is always executing some program, but can store the values of CPU  
    registers, the point of execution in the program, the process memory, etc.  
    This the process's **context**.

    Because of sharing CPU time by **scheduling** and sleeping processes until it's  
    their 'turn', storing context for later retrieval, or **context switching**,  
    is essential to the kernel's **scheduling**.

  * use `ulimit` to display/reset resource limits for processes running under a  
    shell, running with `-a`  gives:
        $ ulimit -a
        core file size          (blocks, -c) 0
        data seg size           (kbytes, -d) unlimited
        scheduling priority             (-e) 0
        file size               (blocks, -f) unlimited
        pending signals                 (-i) 30455
        max locked memory       (kbytes, -l) 64
        max memory size         (kbytes, -m) unlimited
        open files                      (-n) 1024
        pipe size            (512 bytes, -p) 8
        POSIX message queues     (bytes, -q) 819200
        real-time priority              (-r) 0
        stack size              (kbytes, -s) 8192
        cpu time               (seconds, -t) unlimited
        max user processes              (-u) 30455
        virtual memory          (kbytes, -v) unlimited
        file locks                      (-x) unlimited

    * sysadmins may need to adjust values of memory/# of processes/CPU time re-  
      stricted on a system, there are **hard** and **soft** limits, with `root`  
      only able to change the upper (**hard**) limit.

      * `ulimit [options] [limit]`: set a limit, like max # of file descriptors:
            ulimit -n 1600
          * **Note**: to make changes permanent, modify `/etc/security/limits.conf`
            and reboot
  * Processes have permissions based on the user that ran it, and possibly who  
    owns it.

    `setuid` have a different **effective UID** than the **real UID**. They use  
    the `uid` of the owner of the program. Non-`setuid` programs use the `uid` of  
    the user running the program.

  * Processes can be in one of several states:
    * **Running**: actively executing code or in a **run queue** about ready to  
      receive a time slice.

    * **Sleeping**: the process is blocked (waiting) on I/O or another request and  
      cannot proceed until completed. When the request/event is received, the ker-  
      nel will wake up the process and place it on the **run queue** and the **sched-  
      uler** will give it a time slice within which to run.

    * **Stopped**: process is suspended; the state is saved and the program can  
      be resumed. `Ctrl+Z` can stop the foreground shell process.

    * **Zombie**: entered when terminated and no other process has inquired about  
      its exit status, or 'reaped' it.

  * At any given time, a process can be in **user** mode or **system** (**kernel**)  
    mode. Which instructions can be executed in which mode is enforced at the hard-  
    ware level. The mode is a state of the hardware, like the CPU.

    * **Note**: for **Intel** CPUs, **Ring 0** = **system** mode, **Ring 3** for **user**.

    Only when executing a **system call** is a process in **system** mode. When  
    a process is started it is isolated in its own user space, called **process  
    resource isolation**. Even a `setuid` program runs in **user mode** except when  
    executing **system calls**.

    * In **kernel** (**system**) mode the CPU has full access to the hardware. A  
      program must use a **system call** to **context switch** from **user mode**  
      to **kernel** mode.

      The application code doesn't execute in **kernel** mode, the system call just  
      returns a value when complete to the application.

  * A **daemon** process is a background process whose sole purpose is to provide  
    some specific service to users of the system.

    Daemons:
      * only operate when needed
      * can be started, along with other daemons, at boot time
      * often have names that end with **d**
      * may respond to external events (**udevd**) or time (**crond**)
      * usually don't have a controlling terminal or `stdin`/`stdout`
      * might provide some better security control

  * Using `sysvinit`, scripts in the `/etc/init.d` directory start system daemons  
    by invoking commands to a shell function called `daemon` defined in  
    `/etc/init.d/functions` file.

    There are similar files for `systemd` systems.

  * Not all daemons are forked from parent processes; the Linux kernel directly  
    creates two kinds of processes on its own:

    1.  Internal kernel processes: flush buffers to disk, balance CPU load, queue  
        up work for device drivers, etc. These usually run as long as the system is  
        up.

    2.  External user processes: processes in user space that the kernel starts;  
        there are few of these and are usually short-lived.

    One can use `ps -elf`, processes with PPID=2 (**kthreadd**) will have started  
    these processes, and will have their names bracketed.

  * Linux systems are always creating new processes by **forking**, where the orig-  
    inal process keeps running while the child process starts. On single-CPU systems  
    the child usually executes first, then the parent again, but most multi-core  
    systems run both simultaneously.

    One could also follow a `fork` with an `exec` of a command, meaning the new  
    process `exec`ed would inherit the PID of the `fork`ed process and the `fork`ed  
    process would terminate.

    Threads and **forking** take about the same amount of startup time and resources  
    on Linux.

  * Process CPU priorities are controlled through `nice` and `renice`. The higher  
    the **niceness**, the lower the priority.

    Values range from **-20** (highest) to **+19** (the lowest), one can run `nice`  
    like so:
        nice -n 5 command [ARGS]
    which would increase its niceness by 5.

    Not giving `nice` values defaults to increasing niceness by 10. Entering the  
    command shows the current niceness.

    By default, only a superuser can give negative niceness values, but normal users  
    can be given this ability within a predetermined range by editing  
    `/etc/security/limits.conf`

    the command `renice` can be used on a running process:
        renice +3 13848
    which increases PID 13848's niceness by +3

  * There are two types of **libraries** that programs are built with:

      1. Static: the code for the library functions is inserted at compile time,  
        and cannot change without a recompile.

      2. Shared: the code for the library functions are loaded into the program  
        at run time, and if the program is changed later, will run with the updated  
        code.

    * Shared libraries are more memory-efficient as they can be used by many appli-
      cations at once. They may be called **DLL**s (**D**ynamic **L**ink **L**ibraries)

    * Shared libraries need careful versioning. Programs can request a specific  
      **major** version rather than the latest one, but most programs will use the  
      most current **minor** version available.

    
