### 21. Signals

  * Signals emit notifications to take action in response to unpredictable events.  
    These can be internal or external to the application. One can "handle" a signal  
    within a program's code to avoid straight termination.

  * One of the oldest forms of **IPC** (**Inter-Process Communication**) and notify  
    processes about **asynchronous** events.

    **Asynchronous** means:
      * the event not expected

      * the event was expected, but the time unknown

    There are two ways signals are sent to processes:
      1. from kernel to user process from an exception or error

      2. from a user process to the kernel to another user process (they may be the  
        same process)

    Processes must be owned by the same user (or be superuser) to send signals to  
    each other. When a signal is received, a process may **handle** the signal (this  
    must be programmed in) or respond by system defaults. Two signals, **SIGKILL**  
    and **SIGSTOP**, cannot be handled.

  * The type of signal depends on the event that occurred; there are:

    1. Exceptions detected by hardware (ex. illegal memory access)

    2. Exceptions generated by the environment (premature death of a process)

    List all signals with `kill -l`:
        $ kill -l
        1) SIGHUP       2) SIGINT       3) SIGQUIT      4) SIGILL       5) SIGTRAP
        6) SIGABRT      7) SIGEMT       8) SIGFPE       9) SIGKILL     10) SIGBUS
        11) SIGSEGV     12) SIGSYS      13) SIGPIPE     14) SIGALRM     15) SIGTERM
        16) SIGURG      17) SIGSTOP     18) SIGTSTP     19) SIGCONT     20) SIGCHLD
        21) SIGTTIN     22) SIGTTOU     23) SIGIO       24) SIGXCPU     25) SIGXFSZ
        26) SIGVTALRM   27) SIGPROF     28) SIGWINCH    29) SIGPWR      30) SIGUSR1
        31) SIGUSR2     32) SIGRTMIN    33) SIGRTMIN+1  34) SIGRTMIN+2  35) SIGRTMIN+3
        36) SIGRTMIN+4  37) SIGRTMIN+5  38) SIGRTMIN+6  39) SIGRTMIN+7  40) SIGRTMIN+8
        41) SIGRTMIN+9  42) SIGRTMIN+10 43) SIGRTMIN+11 44) SIGRTMIN+12 45) SIGRTMIN+13
        46) SIGRTMIN+14 47) SIGRTMIN+15 48) SIGRTMIN+16 49) SIGRTMAX-15 50) SIGRTMAX-14
        51) SIGRTMAX-13 52) SIGRTMAX-12 53) SIGRTMAX-11 54) SIGRTMAX-10 55) SIGRTMAX-9
        56) SIGRTMAX-8  57) SIGRTMAX-7  58) SIGRTMAX-6  59) SIGRTMAX-5  60) SIGRTMAX-4
        61) SIGRTMAX-3  62) SIGRTMAX-2  63) SIGRTMAX-1  64) SIGRTMAX

    The signals **SIGRTMIN*** are **real-time signals** and do not have a predefined  
    purpose and can be queued up to be handled in a FIFO order

    The meaning attached to signal type indicate what event will trigger them to  
    be sent.

  * a process sends a signal to another process through a system call. Users can  
    send signals to processes with the `kill` command:
      * `kill 1991`: send SIGTERM (15) to process 1991
      * `kill -9 1991`: send signal 9 (SIGKILL) to process 1991
      * `kill -SIGKILL 1991`: same as above

  * `killall` kills all processes that the user has privilege for of a given name:
        killall bash
    or:
        killall -9 bash
    or even:
        killall -SIGTERM bash

  * `pkill` uses selection criteria  to send signals:
        pkill [-signal] [options] [pattern]

    for example:
        pkill -u libby foobar
    kills all of `libby`'s processes named `foobar`

    or:
        pkill -HUP rsyslogd
    makes `rsyslogd` reread its configuration file
