### 27. Package Management Systems

  * Package management systems:

    * Gather and compress software into archives which may depend on other archived  
      software.
    * Allow for easy installation/removal.
    * Can verify the integrity of archives with a database.
    * Can authenticate the origin of packages.
    * Make upgrading easier.
    * Group packages logically.
    * Manage software dependencies.

    Two most common package management systems:

      1. **RPM** (Red Hat Package Manager)
      2. **dpkg** (Debian Package)

    Other:
      * **pacman** (Arch)
      * **portage/emerge** (Gentoo)
      * **tarballs** (Slackware)

  * Low-level utilities are used for individual packages, dependencies are not  
    fully handled; `rpm` or `dpkg` fulfill these roles.

    High-level utilities solve dependency issues, like installing a needed package  
    before the requested one, or preventing the removal of a package other packages  
    depend on.

    `yum` or `zypper` do this for `rpm` systems and `apt-get` and `apt-cache` take  
    care of it for `dpkg` systems.

  * `git` is a source management system that arose from the Linux kernel development  
    community. It works with an **object** database and a directory cache.

    The object database consists of three varieties:
      * **Blobs**: Chunks of binary data containing file contents.
      * **Trees**: Sets of blobs including the file names and attributes, creating the  
        directory structure.
      * **Commits**: Changesets describing tree snapshots.

    The directory cache captures the state of the directory tree.
