### 28. RPM

  * `/var/lib/rpm` is the system directory that holds the RPM database files in  
    Berkeley DB hash files.

    `rpm --rebuilddb` can repair this database from installed package headers.

  * `/usr/lib/rpm/rpm` has helper programs and scripts used by RPM.

  * `rpmrc` is a file that holds the default values for `rpm`. The `rpm` command  
    looks at versions:
      * `/usr/lib/rpm/rpmrc`
      * `/etc/rpmrc`
      * `~/.rpmrc`

    and adds/overrides the results in the above order. Use `rpm --rcfile` to manually  
    specify an alternate.

  * `rpm` queries all include the `-q` flag. Examples:
    * `rpm -q bash` : Which version of bash is installed?
    * `rpm -qf /bin/bash` : To which package does the file belong?
    * `rpm -ql bash` : What files were installed from the package?
    * `rpm -qi bash` : Show info about package.
    * `rpm -qip foo-1.0.0.1.noarch.rpm` : Show info about a specific RPM file, not  
      from the installed package database.
    * `rpm -qa` : List all installed packages.

    Other useful `-q` long options:
      * `--requires` : Use with `-p` on a file to see prerequisites.
      * `--whatprovides` : Use on a filename to find a package that provides the  
        file.

    `-V` option shows whether a local file version differs from the package version:
        $ rpm -V systemd
        .M.......    /var/log/journal
    with the *M* meaning the file permission or type differs, full list:
        S file Size differs
        M Mode differs (includes permissions and file type)
        5 digest (formerly MD5 sum) differs
        D Device major/minor number mismatch
        L readLink(2) path mismatch
        U User ownership differs
        G Group ownership differs
        T mTime differs
        P caPabilities differ
  * Installing a package is a simple as:

    `sudo rpm -ivh foo-1.1.0.1.noarch.rpm`

    where the `-i` is for install, `-v` is for verbose output, and `-h` uses hash  
    marks to show progress.

    If a file exists or was changed from the previous version, it's re-saved with  
    the suffix `.rpmsave`.

  * `-e` uninstalls (erases) a package. This fails if the package is required by  
    other packages on the system.

    Use `--test` with `-e` to see if it would succeed or fail without actually doing it.
