### 30. yum

  * `yum` enables high-level package management for the **RPM** system. It:

    * Uses local and remote repositories for installation/update of binary and  
      source packages.
    * Can automate install/upgrade/removal of software.
    * Automatically resolve dependencies.

  * `yum`'s database/metadata cache can be cleared with the below:
        yum clean [packages|metadata|expire-cache|rpmdb|plugins|all]

  * Extensions are found under `/usr/{bin|sbin}/yum*`

  * **Repo** (repository) config files stored in `/etc/yum.repos.d/` and have
    `.repo` extension.

    In the `.repo` file, one can toggle a repo on/off by setting `enabled` to `0`
    instead of `1`.

  * `yum` can search installed packages and repos with its commands:
    * `sudo yum search keyword` : search for info on keyword.
    * `sudo yum list "*keyword*"` : search for info and show installed/not installed.
    * `sudo yum info package` : display info on *package*.
    * `sudo yum list [installed|updates|available]` : list packages.
    * `sudo yum grouplist [group1, group2,...]` : list info about package groups.
    * `sudo yum groupinfo group1[, group2,...]` : package info about groups.
    * `sudo yum provides "/logrotate.conf"` : show package that provide the file
      (must use at least one `/` in the filename).

  * To verify packages, one might need to install the `yum` plugin `yum-plugin-verify`:
        $ sudo yum install yum-plugin-verify

    To give detailed package verification:
        $ sudo yum verify [package]

    To mimic `rpm -V`:
        $ sudo yum verify-rpm [package]

    All differences including config files:
        $ sudo yum verify-all [package]

  * Install packages:
        sudo yum install package [package2]

    From a local **rpm**:
        sudo yum localinstall package-file

    Install a group:
        sudo yum groupinstall group-name

    Remove a package (and all dependencies):
        sudo yum remove package1 [package2]

    Upgrade a package from a repository:
        sudo yum update [package]

    During install/upgrade, `yum` still saves modified config files with the suffix  
    `.rpmsave`, which can then be manually merged.

  * Available `yum` plugins can be listed with `sudo yum list "yum-plugin*"`.

    Some extended commands are:
      * `sudo yum repolist` : list of all enabled repos.
      * `sudo yum shell [text-file]` : interactive `yum` shell to run multiple  
        commands.
      * `sudo yum install --downloadonly package` : download a package and store  
        (without installing) into `/var/cache/yum`

        You have to install `yum-plugin-downloadonly`.
      * `sudo yum history` : history of `yum` commands issued.
