### 33. User Account Management

  * `/etc/passwd` file has a colon-delimited description of each user account.

    The elements are:

      1. User name.
      2. User password (will be 'x' if password stored externally in `/etc/shadow`).
      3. User Identification Number (UID).
      4. Group Identification Number (GID).
      5. GECOS field for contact info.
      6. Home directory.
      7. Login shell.

  * Add a user:
        sudo useradd stephane

    Note: the password in `/etc/passwd` for a default account is `!`, which means
    **root** will have to set the password before the account can be used.

    Defaults can be overridden with switches:
      * `-s` : change login shell.
      * `-k` : change what files are placed in the home directory.
      * `-c` : change the GECOS info.

  * Root can delete users:
        sudo userdel isabelle

    Note: this does not delete the home directory; use `-r` for that.

  * Change user values with `usermod`:
        $ usermod --help
        Usage: usermod [options] LOGIN

        Options:
        -c, --comment COMMENT         new value of the GECOS field
        -d, --home HOME_DIR           new home directory for the user account
        -e, --expiredate EXPIRE_DATE  set account expiration date to EXPIRE_DATE
        -f, --inactive INACTIVE       set password inactive after expiration
                                      to INACTIVE
        -g, --gid GROUP               force use GROUP as new primary group
        -G, --groups GROUPS           new list of supplementary GROUPS
        -a, --append                  append the user to the supplemental GROUPS
                                      mentioned by the -G option without removing
                                      him/her from other groups
        -h, --help                    display this help message and exit
        -l, --login NEW_LOGIN         new value of the login name
        -L, --lock                    lock the user account
        -m, --move-home               move contents of the home directory to the
                                      new location (use only with -d)
        -o, --non-unique              allow using duplicate (non-unique) UID
        -p, --password PASSWORD       use encrypted password for the new password
        -R, --root CHROOT_DIR         directory to chroot into
        -s, --shell SHELL             new login shell for the user account
        -u, --uid UID                 new UID for the user account
        -U, --unlock                  unlock the user account
        -v, --add-subuids FIRST-LAST  add range of subordinate uids
        -V, --del-subuids FIRST-LAST  remove range of subordinate uids
        -w, --add-subgids FIRST-LAST  add range of subordinate gids
        -W, --del-subgids FIRST-LAST  remove range of subordinate gids

  * Some accounts are locked, or don't allow a login (login shell is `/sbin/nologin`).
    These accounts are usually to run programs with limited privileges.

    A regular user account can be locked:
        sudo usermod -L [user]

    and unlocked:
        sudo usermod -U [user]

  * Normal user UIDs usually start at 1000, this variable is defined in `/etc/login.defs`.

  * There are a couple of colon-separated fields in the `/etc/shadow` file:
      * username
      * password (hashed)
      * lastchange date of last password change in days since 1/1/1970
      * mindays until password can be changed
      * maxdays until password must be changed
      * warn days before expiration where user is warned to change password
      * grace days after expired password before account is locked
      * expire date that account will be locked
      * reserved field

    The password hash is the string "$6$" followed by an eight-character salt value,  
    then an eighty-eight-character password hash (sha512).

    The `/etc/shadow` file is necessary as the permissions for `/etc/passwd` are
    644 (owner root) as some user applications need to read the file, but the hashed
    password could be read and cracked if open to the public, so they are stored  
    in `/etc/shadow` with permissions 400 (owner root).

  * `passwd` is used to change password, but root can change any user's password:
        sudo passwd [user]

    The passwords are verified and accepted by `pam_cracklib.so` library.

  * `chage` sets aging dates for user passwords:
        $ chage --help
        Usage: chage [options] LOGIN

        Options:
          -d, --lastday LAST_DAY        set date of last password change to LAST_DAY
          -E, --expiredate EXPIRE_DATE  set account expiration date to EXPIRE_DATE
          -h, --help                    display this help message and exit
          -I, --inactive INACTIVE       set password inactive after expiration
                                        to INACTIVE
          -l, --list                    show account aging information
          -m, --mindays MIN_DAYS        set minimum number of days before password
                                        change to MIN_DAYS
          -M, --maxdays MAX_DAYS        set maximim number of days before password
                                        change to MAX_DAYS
          -R, --root CHROOT_DIR         directory to chroot into
          -W, --warndays WARN_DAYS      set expiration warning days to WARN_DAYS

    Make user change password at next login:
        sudo chage -d 0 <user>

  * A restricted shell that cannot change from home directory, write to environmental  
    variables, or specify absolute paths to executables, can be started with:
        /bin/bash -r
