### 35. File Permissions and Ownership

  * When listing a file with `ls -l`, traditional linux permissions are listed  
    by a ten-character string like the below:
        -rw-rw-r--

    The first character shows what type of file object it is, then the remaining  
    nine are divided into three groups of three for permissions for:
      1. first, the owner of the file, or user.
      2. second, the group of users that have access.
      3. third, the rest of the world, or other.

    Each of the three groups can have the following permissions, shown by the presence  
    of one of the below letters, and by the `-` character if missing:
      * `r` : read access.
      * `w` : write access.
      * `x` : execute access.

    The permissions are utilized when a file access request is made:
      1. if the requestor is the owner, user permissions are used.
      2. otherwise, if the requestor is in the file's group, group permissions  
         are used.
      3. if neither of those apply, world permissions are used.

  * `chmod` is used to change file permissions. You can only changed files you own,  
    unless you are root.

    One can use alphabetic characters to add/subtract permissions, with `+`/`-`,
    the above permission characters, and the below permission set abbreviations:
      * `u` : user permissions.
      * `o` : other permissions.
      * `g` : group permissions.

    Say a file has the above permissions `-rw-rw-r--`; for adding user execute and
    removing group write permissions, one would run:
        chmod u+x,g-w <file>

    Which would give the permissions `-rwxr--r--`.

    One could also use octal, where read/write/execute permissions are applied as  
    a bitmask, 4 for read, 2 for write, one for execute, which the final, total  
    permissions being added together in the write place:
      * `-r--r--r--` would be 0444.
      * `-rw-rw-rw-` would be 0666.
      * `-rwxrwxrwx` would be 0777.

    And would be used with `chmod` like so:

    for `-rwxrw-r`, one would enter:
        chmod 0764 <file>

  * `chown` changes the file owner/user, and `chgrp` changes the file group:
    * `chown a_user <file>` : file owner is now `a_user`.
    * `chgrp accounting <file>` : group `accounting` members have ownership of file.
    * `chown a_user:accounting <file>` : does both of the above with one command.
    * `-R` : recursive option for all files and subdirectories under a directory.

  * Default permissions for creating a file are 0666 and 0777 for a directory.
    However, this is modified by the **umask** value for that creator, which specifies
    which permissions should be denied by default. The current value can be displayed:
        $ umask
        0022

    This makes default permissions to effectively be 0666 & ~0022 or 0644.
