### 36. Pluggable Authentication Modules (PAM)

  * Applications would traditionally authenticate and create user accounts independently  
    from each other, i.e.: `su`, `login` and `ssh` would each have their own databases  
    and subroutines for authentication.

    Most modern applications support PAM (Pluggable Authentication Modules) so that  
    these tasks can be handled in a centralized way, using `libpam`.

    Its components are:
      * PAM-aware applications.
      * Configuration files in `/etc/pam.d/`.
      * PAM modules in the `libpam*` libraries.

    Each PAM-aware application may have its own config file in `/etc/pam.d/`

  * Several steps to authentication:
      1. User invokes PAM-aware application, like `login`.
      2. The application calls `libpam`.
      3. The library checks for files in `/etc/pam.d/`, which describe which modules
         to invoke.
      4. Each module is executed per the rules there.

  * Each file in `/etc/pam.d/` corresponds to a service, and each line is a rule  
    in the format:
        type control module-path module-arguments

    where `type` specifies the management group the module is associated with:
      * `auth`: prompts for ID, may set credentials and grant privilege.
      * `account`: checks on user accounts, like password aging, ACLs, etc.
      * `password`: may update the user authentication token, usually a password.
      * `session`: used to provide function before and after the session established,  
        like set environmental variables, logging, etc.

    and `control` flag controls how success/failure affects the auth process:
      * `required`: must return success for service to be granted. All other modules  
        still executed, and application not told which failed.
      * `requisite`: same as `required`, but stack is quit on failure, status returned
        to application.
      * `optional`: module not required, if the only module, the return to the application
        may cause failure.

  * LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) is a standard protocol for using/
    administrating distributed directory services over the network. When using LDAP
    for authentication, one connects to a central LDAP server for user authentication.
    TLS can make it secure.

    LDAP uses PAM and `system-config-authentication` or `authconfig-tui`. One specifies  
    the server, DN (domain name) and Transport Security Layer (TLS). Also, `openldap-clients`,
    `pam ldap` and `nss-pam-ldapd` are required.

    Five files are changed when setting up LDAP authentication:
      1. `/etc/openldap/ldap.conf`
      2. `/etc/pam_ldap.conf`
      3. `/etc/nslcd.conf`
      4. `/etc/sssd/sssd.conf`
      5. `/etc/nsswitch.conf`

    These can be edited manually or by the utility programs above.
