### 37. Backup and Recovery Methods

  * `cpio` (CoPy In and Out) is a general file archiver utility that was designed
    for tape backups. It reads a list of files from `stdin` by default and outputs
    to `stdout`.

    Create an archive:
        ls | cpio -o > archive.cpio

    Extract an archive:
        cpio -i < archive.cpio

    List files:
        cpio -t < archive.cpio

  * `tar` is a newer(-ish), easier tape archiving program. Here's some of its help text:
        $ tar --help
        Usage: tar [OPTION...] [FILE]...
        GNU 'tar' saves many files together into a single tape or disk archive, and can
        restore individual files from the archive.

        Examples:
        tar -cf archive.tar foo bar  # Create archive.tar from files foo and bar.
        tar -tvf archive.tar         # List all files in archive.tar verbosely.
        tar -xf archive.tar          # Extract all files from archive.tar.

        Main operation mode:
        -A, --catenate, --concatenate   append tar files to an archive
        -c, --create               create a new archive
        -d, --diff, --compare      find differences between archive and file system
            --delete               delete from the archive (not on mag tapes!)
        -r, --append               append files to the end of an archive
        -t, --list                 list the contents of an archive
            --test-label           test the archive volume label and exit
        -u, --update               only append files newer than copy in archive
        -x, --extract, --get       extract files from an archive

        Device selection and switching:
        -f, --file=ARCHIVE         use archive file or device ARCHIVE

    Use `-N`/`--newer`, or `--after-date` with a date string in format `YYYY-MM-DD`
    to do an incremental backup based on the mtime of files.

    Use flags to compress the tarred archive (be sure to append the filetype to  
    avoid confusion):

      * `-z` (.gz) : Lempel-Ziv coding (LZ77) compression.
      * `-j` (.bz2) : Burrow-Wheeler block-sorting and Huffman coding.
      * `-J` (.xz) : LZMA compression.

  * `dd` does low-level copying of files or entire disks. It is often used to reads
    fixed lenths of info from devices `/dev/zero` or `/dev/urandom`.

    Basic syntax:
        dd if=input-file of=output-file options

    Create 10MB file filled with zeroes:
        dd if=/dev/zero of=outfile bs=1M count=10

    Raw copy an entire hard drive:
        dd if=/dev/sda of=/dev/sdb

    Create image of hard drive:
        dd if=/dev/sda of=sdadisk.img
      Note: partitions can be backed up in this way, as well.

  * `rsync` is used to transfer files across a network (or different local location)
    used like so:
        rsync [options] source destination
    where the target and destination can take the form of [user@]host:/path. The
    `-r` switch can be used to recursively back up a directory, copying only the
    changes.

  * `dump` and `restore` are very old tools that directly read and write the file
    system. They can do full or incremental backups, but are limited in compatibility
    with non-ext\* filesystems.They can, however, be employed by higher-level utilities like **Amanda**.

    Options for `dump`:
      * `-0-9`: `0` is for full backup, higher are incremental.
      * `-B records`: records per volume.
      * `-b blocksize`: KB per record.
      * `-f file`: output device or file.
      * `-u`: update `/etc/dumpdates`.
      * `-W`: print recent dump date in `/etc/dumpdates`.

  * `restore` is used to read `dump` backups. To restore all files relative to the
    current working directory:
        sudo restore -rvf /tmp/boot_backup

    Options:
      * `-r`: restores everything.
      * `-t`: lists files in backup.
      * `-x`: files/directories named are extracted from the backup.
      * `-i`: interactive mode.
  * `mt` controls tape devices, mostly to query/update the tape before/after backups.
    Uses the tape device in environmental variable `TAPE` or used with `-f`option.

    Usage:
        mt [-h] [-f device] operation [count] [arguments]

    where:
      * `-h`: for help info.
      * `-f`: specify device.
      * `operation`: something like `status`, `rewind`, `erase`, `fsf`.
