### 39. Network Devices and Configuration

  * Instead of `eth0, eth1`, `udev` and `systemd` have incorporated bus location
    into the naming of network devices, ex:
      * `enp2s0`: would be PCI bus 2, slot 0 (sometimes a function number), like
        `02:00.0` from `lspci`.

      * Instead of `wlan0` for a wireless card, `wlp3s0` would be wireless card
        on PCI interface `03:00.0`.

  * **NIC** configuration info is stored at various places among the distros.
    RHEL 6 uses `/etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eth0`.

    openSUSE 13.1 would use `/etc/sysconfig/network/ifcfg-eno16777736`.

    Debian-based, like Ubuntu, would use `/etc/network/interfaces`.

  * Bring down an interface:
        ifdown eth0

    Bring it up:
        ifup eth0

  * `ifconfig` is an older UNIX tool for controlling network interfaces.

    Display info on all interfaces:
        ifconfig
    Just on `eth0`:
        ifconfig eth0
    Set the IP address:
        sudo ifconfig eth0 192.168.1.50
    Set the netmask to 24 bit:
        sudo ifconfig eth0 netmask 255.255.255.0
    Bring up interface:
        sudo ifconfig eth0 up
    Bring down the interface:
        sudo ifconfig eth0 down
    Set the MTU (Maximum Transfer Unit):
        sudo ifconfig eth0 mtu 1480

  * `ip` is a newer and faster utility, using `netlink` sockets over `ioctl()` calls.
    Its basic syntax is:
        ip [OPTIONS] OBJECT {COMMAND|help}
    where the possible commands are determined by the object specified.

    Main objects for `ip`:
      * `address`: IPv4 or IPv6 address
      * `link`: network devices
      * `maddress`: multicast address
      * `monitor`: watch for netlink messages
      * `route`: routing table entry
      * `rule`: rule in the routing policy database
      * `tunnel`: tunnel over IP

    Uses for `ip` are multiple.

    Show information for all interfaces:
        ip link

    For one interface:
        ip -s link show eth0

    Set the ip:
        sudo ip addr add 192.168.1.7 dev eth0

    Set the MTU for `eth0`:
        sudo ip link set eth0 mtu 1480

    Set the network route:
        sudo ip route add 172.16.1.0/24 via 192.168.1.5

  * **Routing** is the process of selecting paths for network traffic. The routing  
    table is a list of routes to other networks managed by the system. It defines
    all networks and hosts and sends remote traffic to routers.

    View routing table:
        $ route
        Kernel IP routing table
        Destination     Gateway         Genmask         Flags Metric Ref    Use Iface
        default         gateway         0.0.0.0         UG    600    0        0 wlan0
        192.168.0.0     0.0.0.0         255.255.255.0   U     600    0        0 wlan0

    or with `ip`:
        $ ip route
        default via 192.168.0.1 dev enp2s0  proto static  metric 100
        172.17.0.0/16 dev docker0  proto kernel  scope link  src 172.17.0.1 linkdown
        192.168.0.0/24 dev enp2s0  proto kernel  scope link  src 192.168.0.9  metric 100

    The **default route** is where packets are sent that have no network match in
    the routing table. It can be obtained with DHCP or statically configured. On
    Red Hat, one modifies `/etc/sysconfig/network` with the `GATEWAY=x.x.x.x` line.
    This is NIC-specific on debian systems with `gateway=x.x.x.x` in its network
    scripts files. At runtime, one can use, for example:
        sudo route add default gw 192.168.1.10 enp2s0
    This change would be non-persistent.

    **Static routes** are used when there is more than one router or route. They
    are defined for each interface and can be made persistent. For example:
        sudo ip route add 10.5.0.0/16 via 192.168.1.100
    or could be added to `/etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/route-eth0` with the line:
        10.5.0.0/16 via 172.17.9.1
    On a Debian-based system, one would add lines to `/etc/network/interfaces`:
        iface eth1 inet dhcp
          post-up route add -host 10.1.2.51 eth1
          post-up route add -host 10.1.2.52 eth1
    On a SUSE-based system, one would add lines to `/etc/sysconfig/network/ifroute-eth0`
    like so:
    # Destination Gateway Netmask interface [Type] [Options]
    192.168.1.150 192.168.1.1 255.255.255.255 eth0
